The design spec for muliattach (#26)
opensds/design-specs: specs/capri/Multi-attach.md

# Title

**Author(s)**: [Jack Li](https://github.com/jackhaibo)

## Summary

> This design is proposed to enable multiAttach of volumes.

Reviewer: s/multiAttach/MultiAttach

Author: done

## Motivation

> Currently we refuse to attach a volume that is already attached (in-use). There are situations where a cloud user may have deployed a clustered file-system on a Cinder volume and they would like the ability to attach a volume to multiple hosts/servers at the same time.

Reviewer: s/Currently we refuse to attach a volume that is already attached (in-use)/Currently a request to attach a volume that is already attached (in-use) will be rejected

Remove "on a Cluster volume".  The multi-attach feature should not be limited to just Cinder

Author: Done.

### Goals

> This spec proposes a set of changes to enable and control the use of multiAttach volumes from the OpenSDS side.

Reviewer: s/multiAttach/MultiAttach

Author: Done.

## Design Details

> 1. The drivers that support multi-attach ability need to report this in their capabilities through pool configuration file. The multi-attach volume creation request will select multi-attach enabled pool from pools which come from different drivers that many of them may not support this ability. 

Reviewer: s/different drivers that many of them may not support this ability/different drivers and many of them may not support this ability.

Author: Done.

2. Attach a volume as one would normally do (Read Write access) to a host and then attach it to another host in Read Only mode or Read Write Mode. In order to implement this, add an item AttachMode to the volume attachment which has two values: RO (Read Only) and RW (Read Write), default is RW. 
3. Add multiAttach bool to the volume model to enables/disables the ability of multi-attach. 

> 4. Add 'multiAttach': '<is> True' to the profile and do some corresponding changes to the controller to choose driver if user require a multi-attach volume.

Reviewer: s/user require/user requires

Author: Done.

	Status string `json:"status,omitempty"`
	PoolId string `json:"poolId,omitempty"`
	ProfileId string `json:"profileId,omitempty"`
	Metadata map[string]string `json:"metadata,omitempty"`
	SnapshotId string `json:"snapshotId,omitempty"`
	SnapshotFromCloud bool `json:"snapshotFromCloud,omitempty"`
	ReplicationId string `json:"replicationId,omitempty"`
	ReplicationDriverData map[string]string `json:"replicationDriverData,omitempty"`
	AttachStatus string
	MultiAttach bool `json:"multiAttach"`
}
```

### REST API impact

N/A

### Security impact

N/A

### Other end user impact

N/A

### Performance impact

User first needs to use the following command to create a multi-attach related profile and specify it in volume creation.

```
osdsctl profile create '{"name": "multi-attach", "description": "multi attach profile","customProperties":{"multiAttach":"<is> true"}}'
```

### Other deployer impact

N/A

### Developer impact

Drivers will need to add a capabilities field "multiAttach: True/False" to their pool configuration files, and do any special handling on their end for connecting/disconnecting volumes in this category.

## Use Cases

> 1. There are products that can be used like Oracle RAC that would make things like H/A databases via a shared Block device possible which is something of interest.

Reviewer: s/There are products that can be used like Oracle RAC that would make things like H/A databases via a shared Block device possible which is something of interest./There are products such as Oracle RAC that can leverage this feature. Oracle RAC uses H/A database via a shared block device.

Author: Done.

2. Attach a volume as one would normally do (Read Write access) to a host and then attach it to another host in Read Only mode or Read Write Mode. In order to implement this, add an item AttachMode to the volume attachment which has two values: RO (Read Only) and RW (Read Write), default is RW. 
3. Add multiAttach bool to the volume model to enables/disables the ability of multi-attach. 
4. Add 'multiAttach': '<is> True' to the profile and do some corresponding changes to the controller to choose backend if user require a multi-attach volume.

### Data model impact

1. Add MultiAttach field in dock spec and dock will load configuration file that has the key value pair multiAttach:true/false and then fill the field.
```
type DockSpec struct {
	*BaseModel
	Type string `json:"type,omitempty"`
	Name string `json:"name,omitempty"`
	Description string `json:"description,omitempty"`
	Status string `json:"status,omitempty"`
	StorageType string `json:"storageType,omitempty"`
	Endpoint string `json:"endpoint,omitempty"`
	NodeId string `json:"nodeId,omitempty"`
	DriverName string `json:"driverName,omitempty"`

> 	MultiAttach bool `json:"multiAttach,omitempty"`

Reviewer 2: Only pool can express storage's capabilities, please remove it from here.

Reviewer: It looks odd to have this MultiAttach parameter in DockSpec.  You are right that this is a driver capability, but it is still redundant to keep it here since it is already in PoolSpec.  I prefer to remove it from DockSpec and only keep it in PoolSpec.

Author: Ok, I will modify it.

Author: It is really redundant.

Author: Already removed. Please review again. @xing-yang

	Metadata map[string]string `json:"metadata,omitempty"`	
}
```

2. Add MultiAttach field in pool spec

```
type StoragePoolSpec struct {
	*BaseModel
	Name string `json:"name,omitempty"`
	Description string `json:"description,omitempty"`
	Status string `json:"status,omitempty"`
	DockId string `json:"dockId,omitempty"`
	AvailabilityZone string `json:"availabilityZone,omitempty"`
	TotalCapacity int64 `json:"totalCapacity,omitempty"`
	FreeCapacity int64 `json:"freeCapacity,omitempty"`
	StorageType string `json:"storageType,omitempty"`
	Extras StoragePoolExtraSpec `json:"extras,omitempty"`
	ReplicationType string `json:"replicationType,omitempty"`
	ReplicationDriverName string `json:"replicationDriverName,omitempty"`

	// MultiAttach
	// If true, this volume can attach to more than one instance. Default will be multiAttach:False

> 	MultiAttach bool `json:"multiAttach,omitempty"`

Reviewer 2: What's the value of `MultiAttach` if pool's storage type is file?  is it better remove it because `MultiAttach` is always `True`?

Author: It cannot be removed and cannot always True.

Author: Let's then find a way if pool's storage type is file.

Author: If the type of the pool is pool, then analyze

	Status string `json:"status,omitempty"`
	Metadata map[string]string `json:"metadata,omitempty"`
	HostInfo `json:"hostInfo,omitempty"`
	ConnectionInfo `json:"connectionInfo,omitempty"`
	AccessProtocol string `json:"accessProtocol,omitempty"`
	AttachMode string `json:"attachMode,omitempty"`
}
```

4. The volume struct adds MultiAttach.

```
type VolumeSpec struct {
	*BaseModel
	TenantId string `json:"tenantId,omitempty"`
	UserId string `json:"userId,omitempty"`
	Name string `json:"name,omitempty"`
	Description string `json:"description,omitempty"`
	GroupId string `json:"groupId,omitempty"`
	Size int64 `json:"size,omitempty"`
	AvailabilityZone string `json:"availabilityZone,omitempty"`
	Status string `json:"status,omitempty"`
	PoolId string `json:"poolId,omitempty"`
	ProfileId string `json:"profileId,omitempty"`
	Metadata map[string]string `json:"metadata,omitempty"`
	SnapshotId string `json:"snapshotId,omitempty"`
	SnapshotFromCloud bool `json:"snapshotFromCloud,omitempty"`
	ReplicationId string `json:"replicationId,omitempty"`
	ReplicationDriverData map[string]string `json:"replicationDriverData,omitempty"`
	AttachStatus string
	MultiAttach bool `json:"multiAttach"`
}
```

> ### REST API impact

Reviewer 2: please add impact for API

Author: There is no impact for API.

Reviewer 2: When creating volume, user can specify `multiattach` in request body, please add the impact of volume api.

> N/A

Reviewer: This should affect profiles too.  How does user request a volume with multi-attach capability?

Author: Please see performance impact for details.
User first needs to use the following command to create a multi-attach related profile and specify it in volume creation.

```
osdsctl profile create '{"name": "multi-attach", "description": "multi attach profile","customProperties":{"multiAttach":"<is> true"}}'
```

Reviewer 2: volume has the `multiattach` attribute, user can specify it in volume creation body. profile don't have to specify the capability.

## Design Details

1. The backend devices that support multi-attach ability need to report this in their capabilities in yaml configuration file. And pools belong to this backend should inherit the capability, because multi-attach volume creation request will select multi-attach enabled pool from pools whch come from different backend that may not support this ability. 
2. Attach a volume as one would normally do (Read Write access) to a host and then attach it to another host in Read Only mode or Read Write Mode. In order to implement this, add an item AttachMode to the volume attachment which has two values: RO (Read Only) and RW (Read Write), default is RW. 
3. Add multiAttach bool to the volume model to enables/disables the ability of multi-attach. 
4. Add 'multiattach': '<is> True' to the profile and do some corresponding changes to the controller to choose backend if user require a multi-attach volume.

### Data model impact

1. Add MultiAttach field in dock spec and dock will load configuration file that has the key value pair multiAttach:true/false and then fill the field.

> ```

Reviewer 3: You can enable go-style by adding `go` here.

Author: How to add it?

Reviewer 3: Something like ```go

	Name string `json:"name,omitempty"`
	Description string `json:"description,omitempty"`
	Status string `json:"status,omitempty"`
	StorageType string `json:"storageType,omitempty"`
	Endpoint string `json:"endpoint,omitempty"`
	NodeId string `json:"nodeId,omitempty"`
	DriverName string `json:"driverName,omitempty"`
	MultiAttach bool `json:"multiAttach,omitempty"`
	Metadata map[string]string `json:"metadata,omitempty"`	
}
```

2. Add MultiAttach field in pool spec

```
type StoragePoolSpec struct {
	*BaseModel
	Name string `json:"name,omitempty"`
	Description string `json:"description,omitempty"`
	Status string `json:"status,omitempty"`
	DockId string `json:"dockId,omitempty"`
	AvailabilityZone string `json:"availabilityZone,omitempty"`
	TotalCapacity int64 `json:"totalCapacity,omitempty"`
	FreeCapacity int64 `json:"freeCapacity,omitempty"`
	StorageType string `json:"storageType,omitempty"`
	Extras StoragePoolExtraSpec `json:"extras,omitempty"`
	ReplicationType string `json:"replicationType,omitempty"`
	ReplicationDriverName string `json:"replicationDriverName,omitempty"`

	// Multiattach
	// If true, this volume can attach to more than one instance. Default will be multiattach:False

> 	Multiattach bool `json:"multiattach,omitempty"`

Reviewer 3: s/Multiattach/MultiAttach

Author: Modified.

}
```

3. The volume attachment struct adds AttachMode, read-only (‘ro’) or read-and-write (‘rw’), default is ‘rw’.

```
type VolumeAttachmentSpec struct {
	*BaseModel
	TenantId string `json:"tenantId,omitempty"`
	UserId string `json:"userId,omitempty"`
	VolumeId string `json:"volumeId,omitempty"`
	Mountpoint string `json:"mountpoint,omitempty"`
	Status string `json:"status,omitempty"`
	Metadata map[string]string `json:"metadata,omitempty"`
	HostInfo `json:"hostInfo,omitempty"`
	ConnectionInfo `json:"connectionInfo,omitempty"`
	AccessProtocol string `json:"accessProtocol,omitempty"`
	AttachMode string `json:"attachMode,omitempty"`
}
```

> 4. The volume struct adds multiAttach.

Reviewer 3: s/multiAttach/MultiAttach

```
type VolumeSpec struct {
	*BaseModel
	TenantId string `json:"tenantId,omitempty"`
	UserId string `json:"userId,omitempty"`
	Name string `json:"name,omitempty"`
	Description string `json:"description,omitempty"`
	GroupId string `json:"groupId,omitempty"`
	Size int64 `json:"size,omitempty"`
	AvailabilityZone string `json:"availabilityZone,omitempty"`
	Status string `json:"status,omitempty"`
	PoolId string `json:"poolId,omitempty"`
	ProfileId string `json:"profileId,omitempty"`
	Metadata map[string]string `json:"metadata,omitempty"`
	SnapshotId string `json:"snapshotId,omitempty"`
	SnapshotFromCloud bool `json:"snapshotFromCloud,omitempty"`
	ReplicationId string `json:"replicationId,omitempty"`
	ReplicationDriverData map[string]string `json:"replicationDriverData,omitempty"`
	AttachStatus string
	MultiAttach bool `json:"multiAttach"`
}
```

### REST API impact

N/A

### Security impact

N/A

### Other end user impact

The CLI need some changes that enable to create a multi-attach volume.

### Performance impact

N/A

### Other deployer impact

> How does it affect the deployment? Are there config option changes?

Reviewer 3: What do you mean here?

Author: Already modified.

# Title

**Author(s)**: [Jack Li](https://github.com/jackhaibo)

## Summary

This design is proposed to enable MultiAttach of volumes.

## Motivation

Currently a request to attach a volume that is already attached (in-use) will be rejected. There are situations where a cloud user may have deployed a clustered file-system and they would like the ability to attach a volume to multiple hosts/servers at the same time.

### Goals

This spec proposes a set of changes to enable and control the use of MultiAttach volumes from the OpenSDS side.

## Design Details

1. The drivers that support multi-attach ability need to report this in their capabilities through pool configuration file. The multi-attach volume creation request will select multi-attach enabled pool from pools which come from different drivers and many of them may not support this ability. 
2. Attach a volume as one would normally do (Read Write access) to a host and then attach it to another host in Read Only mode or Read Write Mode. In order to implement this, add an item AttachMode to the volume attachment which has two values: RO (Read Only) and RW (Read Write), default is RW. 

> 3. Add multiAttach bool to the volume model to enables/disables the ability of multi-attach. 

Reviewer 4: enable/disable rather than enables/disables
```suggestion
3. Add multiAttach bool to the volume model to enable/disable the ability of multi-attach. 
```

Author: Done.

> 4. Add 'multiAttach': '<is> True' to the profile and do some corresponding changes to the controller to choose driver if user requires a multi-attach volume.

Reviewer 3: Please format the field to `"capabilities:multiAttach": "<is> True"`

Author: Done.

	Mountpoint string `json:"mountpoint,omitempty"`
	Status string `json:"status,omitempty"`
	Metadata map[string]string `json:"metadata,omitempty"`
	HostInfo `json:"hostInfo,omitempty"`
	ConnectionInfo `json:"connectionInfo,omitempty"`
	AccessProtocol string `json:"accessProtocol,omitempty"`
	AttachMode string `json:"attachMode,omitempty"`
}
```

3. The volume struct adds MultiAttach.

```
type VolumeSpec struct {
	*BaseModel
	TenantId string `json:"tenantId,omitempty"`
	UserId string `json:"userId,omitempty"`
	Name string `json:"name,omitempty"`
	Description string `json:"description,omitempty"`
	GroupId string `json:"groupId,omitempty"`
	Size int64 `json:"size,omitempty"`
	AvailabilityZone string `json:"availabilityZone,omitempty"`
	Status string `json:"status,omitempty"`
	PoolId string `json:"poolId,omitempty"`
	ProfileId string `json:"profileId,omitempty"`
	Metadata map[string]string `json:"metadata,omitempty"`
	SnapshotId string `json:"snapshotId,omitempty"`
	SnapshotFromCloud bool `json:"snapshotFromCloud,omitempty"`
	ReplicationId string `json:"replicationId,omitempty"`
	ReplicationDriverData map[string]string `json:"replicationDriverData,omitempty"`

> 	AttachStatus string

Reviewer 3: What's the meaning of `AttachStatus` here? Is it related to multi-attch?

Reviewer 4: Also, if it is related to multi-attach then can it be a valid scenario that volume has been attached to say one host successfully, but for other host it is in error state. How will it handle it?

Author: This field is deprecated.

Author: @kumarashit The status of volume attachment related another host attach failed will be error.This field is deprecated.

	MultiAttach bool `json:"multiAttach"`
}
```

### REST API impact

N/A

### Security impact

N/A

### Other end user impact

> N/A

Reviewer 3: User needs to configure the `multiAttach` flag for their backend pools, which should be end user impact.

Author: Done.

> ### Performance impact

Reviewer 4: If there is request for multi-attach, can it have performance impact based upon the attachment request/response from different nodes?

Author: Performance impact haven't considered this yet.

> User first needs to use the following command to create a multi-attach related profile and specify it in volume creation.

Reviewer 3: It's not a performance impact, please move it to Other deployer impact.

Author: Done.

```

> osdsctl profile create '{"name": "multi-attach", "description": "multi attach profile","customProperties":{"multiAttach":"<is> true"}}'

Reviewer 3: Please modify `multiAttach` to `capabilities:multiAttach`.

Author: Done.

```

### Other deployer impact

N/A

### Developer impact

Drivers will need to add a capabilities field "multiAttach: True/False" to their pool configuration files, and do any special handling on their end for connecting/disconnecting volumes in this category.

## Use Cases

1. There are products such as Oracle RAC that can leverage this feature. Oracle RAC uses H/A database via a shared block device.

> 2. Passive stand-by servers/volumes.

Reviewer 4: Maybe we can add that: multi-attach may be required active/active or active/passive scenario.

Author: Sure.

## Implementation

1. Update the configuration files of pools belong to a driver that support multi-attach to report this capability.
2. Update the state machine to accommodate multi-attach.
2. Update the controller to select a multi-attach enabled pool based on profile at volume create time.
3. Update attach/detach to be multiAttach aware.

> 4. Update nbp to enable multiAttach.

Reviewer: Please add a section to explain what changes are needed in nbp.

Author: Done.

> # Title

Reviewer 3: Please add the title here.

Author: Done.

### Goals

This spec proposes a set of changes to enable and control the use of MultiAttach volumes from the OpenSDS side.

## Design Details

1. The drivers that support multi-attach ability need to report this in their capabilities through pool configuration file. The multi-attach volume creation request will select multi-attach enabled pool from pools which come from different drivers and many of them may not support this ability. 
2. Attach a volume as one would normally do (Read Write access) to a host and then attach it to another host in Read Only mode or Read Write Mode. In order to implement this, add an item AttachMode to the volume attachment which has two values: RO (Read Only) and RW (Read Write), default is RW. 
3. Add multiAttach bool to the volume model to enable/disable the ability of multi-attach. 
4. Add 'capabilities:multiAttach': '<is> True' to the profile and do some corresponding changes to the controller to choose driver if user requires a multi-attach volume.

### Data model impact

1. Add MultiAttach field in pool spec

> ```

Reviewer 3: Please add a golang tag here.

Author: Done.

type StoragePoolSpec struct {
	*BaseModel
	Name string `json:"name,omitempty"`
	Description string `json:"description,omitempty"`
	Status string `json:"status,omitempty"`
	DockId string `json:"dockId,omitempty"`
	AvailabilityZone string `json:"availabilityZone,omitempty"`
	TotalCapacity int64 `json:"totalCapacity,omitempty"`
	FreeCapacity int64 `json:"freeCapacity,omitempty"`
	StorageType string `json:"storageType,omitempty"`
	Extras StoragePoolExtraSpec `json:"extras,omitempty"`
	ReplicationType string `json:"replicationType,omitempty"`
	ReplicationDriverName string `json:"replicationDriverName,omitempty"`

	// MultiAttach
	// If true, this volume can attach to more than one instance. Default will be multiAttach:False
	MultiAttach bool `json:"multiAttach,omitempty"`
}
```

2. The volume attachment struct adds AttachMode, read-only (‘ro’) or read-and-write (‘rw’), default is ‘rw’.

> ```

Reviewer 3: Same here.

Author: Done.

type VolumeAttachmentSpec struct {
	*BaseModel
	TenantId string `json:"tenantId,omitempty"`
	UserId string `json:"userId,omitempty"`
	VolumeId string `json:"volumeId,omitempty"`
	Mountpoint string `json:"mountpoint,omitempty"`
	Status string `json:"status,omitempty"`
	Metadata map[string]string `json:"metadata,omitempty"`
	HostInfo `json:"hostInfo,omitempty"`
	ConnectionInfo `json:"connectionInfo,omitempty"`
	AccessProtocol string `json:"accessProtocol,omitempty"`
	AttachMode string `json:"attachMode,omitempty"`
}
```

3. The volume struct adds MultiAttach.

> ```

Reviewer 3: Same here.

Author: Done.

## References

https://github.com/openstack/cinder-specs/blob/master/specs/queens/enable-multiattach.rst#id2

## Driver configuration yaml file example for Multi-Attach

```
authOptions:
  username: "admin"
  password: "IaaS@PORTAL-CLOUD9!"
  # Whether to encrypt the password. If enabled, the value of the password must be ciphertext.
  EnableEncrypted: false
  # Encryption and decryption tool. Default value is aes. The decryption tool can only decrypt the corresponding ciphertext.
  PwdEncrypter: "aes"

>   url: "https://8.46.195.74:28443"

Reviewer: Is this IP address real?  If so, please change to a fake one.

Author: sure

  fmIp: 8.46.195.74
  fsaIp:
    - 8.46.195.71
    - 8.46.195.72

>     - 8.46.195.73

Reviewer: Same question as above.  Please make sure all the IP addresses and credentials you provided in this file are fake ones.

Author: Sure
